CASE:S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom [GC]
Article 8 (Right to Respect for Private and Family Life) - Retention of DNA and Fingerprints

---
CASE SUMMARİES:
S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom [GC] - 30562/04 and 30566/04
Judgment 4.12.2008 [GC]
Article 8

Article 8-1

Respect for private life

Retention of fingerprints and DNA information in cases where defendant in criminal proceedings is acquitted or discharged: violation
 
Facts: Under section 64 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE), fingerprints and DNA samples taken from a person suspected of a criminal offence may be retained without limit of time, even if the subsequent criminal proceedings end in that person's acquittal or discharge. In the case before the Court, both applicants had been charged with criminal offences but not convicted. The first applicant, an eleven-year-old minor, had been acquitted of attempted robbery while in a separate case proceedings against the second applicant for the alleged harassment of his partner had been formally discontinued after the couple reconciled. In view of the fact that they had not been convicted, the applicants asked for their fingerprints and cellular samples to be destroyed, but in both cases the police refused. Their applications for judicial review of that refusal were rejected in a decision that was upheld on appeal. Giving the lead judgment in the House of Lords, Lord Steyn noted that, even assuming there to have been an interference with the applicants' private life, it was very modest and was proportionate to the aim pursued, as the materials were only to be kept for limited purposes and were of no use without a comparator from the crime scene while an expanded database conferred enormous advantages in the fight against serious crime.
Law: (a) Interference: Given the nature and the amount of personal information contained in cellular samples, including a unique genetic code of great relevance to both the individual concerned and his or her relatives, and the capacity of DNA profiles to provide a means of identifying genetic relationships between individuals or of drawing inferences about their ethnic origin, the retention of both cellular samples and DNA profiles in itself amounted to an interference with the applicants' right to respect for their private lives. While the retention of fingerprints had less of an impact on private life than the retention of cellular samples and DNA profiles, the unique information fingerprints contained about the individual concerned and their retention without his or her consent could not be regarded as neutral or insignificant and also constituted an interference with the right to respect for private life.
(b) In accordance with law: Although, in view of its conclusions as to whether the interference was necessary in a democratic society, the Court did not find it necessary to decide whether the wording of section 64 of PACE met the “quality of law” requirements, it nevertheless noted that that provision was far from precise as to the conditions attached to and arrangements for the storing and use of the information contained in the samples and profiles and that it was essential to have clear, detailed rules governing the scope and application of such measures, as well as minimum safeguards.
(c) Legitimate aim: It was accepted that the retention of the information pursued the legitimate purpose of the prevention of crime by assisting in the identification of future offenders.
(d) Necessary in a democratic society: As to the scope of the Court's examination, the question before it was not whether the retention of fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles could in general be regarded as justified under the Convention but whether their retention in the cases of the applicants, as persons who had been suspected, but not convicted, of certain criminal offences, was so justified. The core principles of the relevant instruments of the Council of Europe and the law and practice of the other Contracting States required retention of data to be proportionate in relation to the purpose of collection and limited in time, particularly in the police sector. The protection afforded by Article 8 would be unacceptably weakened if the use of modern scientific techniques in the criminal-justice system were allowed at any cost and without carefully balancing their potential benefits against important private-life interests. Any State claiming a pioneer role in the development of new technologies bore special responsibility for striking the right balance. In that respect, the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the power of retention in England and Wales was particularly striking, since it allowed data to be retained irrespective of the nature or gravity of the offence or of the age of the suspect. Likewise, retention was not limited in time and there existed only limited possibilities for an acquitted individual to have the data removed from the nationwide database or to have the materials destroyed. Nor was there any provision for independent review of the justification for the retention according to defined criteria. The risk of stigmatisation was of particular concern, with persons who had not been convicted of any offence and were entitled to the presumption of innocence finding themselves treated in the same way as convicted persons. Retention could be especially harmful in the case of minors such as the first applicant, given their special situation and the importance of their development and integration in society. In conclusion, the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the powers of retention, as applied in the applicants' case, had failed to strike a fair balance between the competing public and private interests, and the respondent State had overstepped any acceptable margin of appreciation in that regard. Accordingly, the retention constituted a disproportionate interference with the applicants' right to respect for private life and could not be regarded as necessary in a democratic society.
Conclusion: violation (unanimously).
Article 41 – Finding of a violation constituted sufficient just satisfaction in respect of non-pecuniary damage. Respondent State to implement, under Committee of Ministers' supervision, appropriate general and/or individual measures.


CASE: Ahmet Yıldırım v. Turkey
Article 10 (Freedom of Expression) - Wholesale Blocking of a Host Platform 

---
CASE SUMMARİES:
Ahmet Yıldırım v. Turkey - 3111/10
Judgment 18.12.2012 [Section II]
Article 10

Article 10-1

Freedom of expression

Interim court order incidentally blocking access to host and third-party websites in addition to website concerned by proceedings: violation
Facts – The applicant owns and runs a website on which he publishes material including his academic work. It was set up using the Google Sites website creation and hosting service. On 23 June 2009 the Criminal Court of First Instance ordered the blocking of another Internet site under the Law on regulating publications on the Internet and combating Internet offences. The order was issued as a preventive measure in the context of criminal proceedings. Later that day, under the same Law, a copy of the blocking order was sent to the Telecommunications Directorate for execution. On 24 June 2009, further to a request by the Telecommunications Directorate, the Criminal Court of First Instance varied its decision and ordered the blocking of all access to Google Sites. As a result, the applicant was unable to access his own site. On 1 July 2009 he applied to have the blocking order set aside in respect of his own site, which had no connection with the site that had been blocked because of its illegal content. On 13 July 2009 the Criminal Court dismissed the applicant’s application. In April 2012 he was still unable to access his own website even though, as far as he understood, the criminal proceedings against the owner of the offending site had been discontinued in March 2011.
Law – Article 10: Following the blocking of another website as a preventive measure, the court had subsequently, further to a request by the Telecommunications Directorate, ordered the blocking of all access to Google Sites, which also hosted the applicant’s site. This had entailed a restriction amounting to interference with the applicant’s right to freedom of expression.
The blocking of the offending site had a basis in law but it was clear that neither the applicant’s site nor Google Sites fell within the scope of the relevant law since there was insufficient reason to suspect that their content might be illegal. No judicial proceedings had been brought against either of them. Furthermore, although Google Sites was held responsible for the content of a site it hosted, the law made no provision for the wholesale blocking of access to the service. Nor was there any indication that Google Sites had been informed that it was hosting illegal content or that it had refused to comply with an interim measure concerning a site that was the subject of pending criminal proceedings. Furthermore, the law had conferred extensive powers on an administrative body, the Telecommunications Directorate, in implementing a blocking order since it had been able to request an extension of the scope of the order even though no proceedings had been brought in respect of the site or domain concerned and no real need for wholesale blocking had been established.
Such prior restraints were not, in principle, incompatible with the Convention, but they had to be part of a legal framework ensuring both tight control over the scope of bans and effective judicial review to prevent possible abuses. However, in ordering the blocking of all access to Google Sites, the Criminal Court of First Instance had simply referred to the Telecommunications Directorate’s opinion that this was the only possible way of blocking the offending site, without ascertaining whether a less severe measure could be taken. In addition, one of the applicant’s main arguments in his application of 1 July 2009 to set the blocking order aside was that to prevent other sites from being affected by the measure in question, a method should have been chosen whereby only the offending site became inaccessible. However, there was no indication that the judges considering his application had sought to weigh up the various interests at stake. This shortcoming was merely a consequence of the wording of the law itself, which did not lay down any obligation for the domestic courts to examine whether the wholesale blocking of Google Sites was necessary, having regard to the criteria established and applied by the Court under Article 10 of the Convention. Such wholesale blocking had rendered large amounts of information inaccessible, thus substantially restricting the rights of Internet users and having a significant collateral effect. The interference had therefore not been foreseeable and had not afforded the applicant the degree of protection to which he was entitled by the rule of law in a democratic society. The measure in issue had had arbitrary effects and could not be said to have been designed solely to block access to the offending site. Furthermore, the judicial-review procedures concerning the blocking of Internet sites were insufficient to meet the criteria for avoiding abuses; domestic law did not provide for any safeguards to ensure that a blocking order concerning a specified site was not used as a means of blocking access in general.
Conclusion: violation (unanimously).
Article 41: EUR 7,500 in respect of non-pecuniary damage.

CASE: Brambilla and Others v. Italy
Article 10 (Freedom to Receive Information) - Interception of Confidential Police Communications by Journalists.

---
CASE SUMMARİES:
Brambilla and Others v. Italy - 22567/09
Judgment 23.6.2016 [Section I]
Article 10

Article 10-1

Freedom to receive information

Conviction of journalists for possessing and using radio equipment to intercept confidential police communications: no violation
Facts – The first applicant is the director of a local online newspaper and the remaining two applicants are journalists working for the newspaper.
In August 2002 the applicants listened in on a conversation during which the carabinieri decided to send a patrol to a location where weapons were being stored illegally. The second and third applicants arrived at the scene while the carabinieri were there. After obtaining a search warrant the carabinieri searched their vehicle and found two items of equipment capable of intercepting police radio communications. They later went to the newspaper’s offices and seized two pieces of equipment tuned to the radio frequencies used by the carabinieri. Other frequencies used by police operational centres were stored in the equipment’s memory.
The applicants were convicted on appeal and received custodial sentences of between six months and one year and three months. The radio equipment was also seized. However, the sentences were suspended by the Court of Appeal. The Court of Cassation dismissed the appeals lodged by the applicants.
Law – Article 10: The Court doubted whether there had been interference with the applicants’ freedom of expression in the present case. Even assuming that Article 10 was applicable, the Court observed that the search and seizure operation and the custodial sentences imposed on the applicants had been prescribed by law.
The measures in question had pursued legitimate aims, in particular the protection of the rights of others and, with more specific reference to the interception of the police communications, the protection of national security and the prevention of disorder and crime.
The applicants had not been prohibited from bringing the news items to the public’s attention. Their conviction had been based solely on the possession and use of radio equipment to intercept police communications, which were confidential under domestic law, in order to obtain information more rapidly.
The courts’ decisions finding that communications between members of the law-enforcement agencies were confidential, and that the journalists’ actions were therefore to be classified as criminal conduct, had also been duly reasoned.
In seeking to obtain information for publication in a local newspaper the applicants had acted in a manner which, according to domestic law and the consistent interpretation of the Court of Cassation, contravened the criminal law prohibiting in general terms the interception by any persons of conversations not addressed to them, including conversations between law-enforcement officers. Furthermore, the journalists’ actions had comprised a technique which they used routinely in the course of their journalistic activity.
Lastly, the Court of Appeal had suspended the applicants’ sentences and there was no evidence in the case file to demonstrate that they had served their custodial sentences. Accordingly, the penalties imposed on the applicants did not appear disproportionate.
The courts had made an appropriate distinction between the applicants’ duty to comply with domestic law and their pursuit of their journalistic activity, which had not otherwise been restricted.
Conclusion: no violation (unanimously).
(See Stoll v. Switzerland [GC], 69698/01, 10 December 2007, Information Note 103; Pentikäinen v. Finland [GC], 11882/10, 20 October 2015, Information Note 189; Erdtmann v. Germany (dec.), 56328/10, 5 January 2016, Information Note 192; and Salihu and Others v. Sweden (dec.), 33628/15, Information Note 196)


CASE: Kaboğlu and Oran v. Turkey
Article 8 (Right to Respect for Private Life) - Failure to Protect Academics from Hate Speech and Threats 

---
CASE SUMMARİES:
Kaboğlu and Oran v. Turkey - 1759/08, 50766/10 and 50782/10
Judgment 30.10.2018 [Section II]
Article 8

Article 8-1

Respect for private life

Failure by the courts to protect authors of a report on minority rights from verbal abuse and physical threats published in the press: violation
Facts – The applicants are university lecturers specialising in human rights. Insults and threats were directed against them in the press on account of certain ideas they had expressed in a report on minority rights and cultural rights prepared by the Advisory Council on Human Rights, a body in which they held high office. The report departed from existing law and practice in the protection of minority rights in Turkey at the material time, particularly on account of ideas and proposals which suggested a fundamental change in mentality in such matters and advocated a transition from the idea of a homogenous and monocultural society towards a multi-identity, multicultural, democratic, liberal and pluralistic society.
Law – Article 8: Having regard to the harsh criticisms made against the applicants in the impugned articles, the damage to their reputation reached the requisite threshold of seriousness for Article 8 of the Convention to be engaged.
In so far as the criticisms against the applicants were based on the work that they had carried out in the context of their duties as experts appointed by the public authorities to advise on specific questions within the Advisory Council, the applicants could not be assimilated to political figures who would be expected to show a greater degree of tolerance to such remarks.
The offending articles, in view of their nature, amounted to value judgments and were undeniably part of a debate in the general interest, triggered by the report, concerning the situation and rights of minorities in Turkish society.
The articles contained harsh criticisms, expressed in some places directly and pointedly, in others with irony. They called into question the applicants’ good faith and integrity, stigmatising them as intellectuals who were insensitive to the interests of the Turkish nation and who were being guided and rewarded by foreign powers. The provocative, mischievous and rather offensive style and content of the articles in question could not be regarded, as a whole, as devoid of any sufficient factual basis or as gratuitously insulting, in the context of a lively public debate concerning a report on a sensitive subject that was likely to provoke concerns within nationalist circles about the unity of the Turkish nation and State structure. The two applicants had been victims of incidents and threats which helped to understand the tension in this context.
Certain passages in the articles at issue were clearly such as to directly or indirectly incite or justify violence. The relevant sentences, together with the stigmatising expressions widely used in the articles, incited hatred against the authors of the report, including the applicants, and exposed them to a risk of physical violence, especially as the articles were published in daily newspapers with nationwide circulation. In the Court’s view, the risk that such writings could encourage acts of violence against the applicants should not be underestimated. It pointed out, in this regard, that a Turkish journalist, Fırat Dink, had been murdered by an ultra-nationalist following a stigmatisation campaign accompanied by death threats on account of his heterodox views on a question that was deemed to be sensitive in Turkish society (see Dink v. Turkey, 2668/07 et al., 14 September 2010, Information Note 133).
The applicants had exercised their freedom of expression through the report at issue by presenting their views without, however, using derogatory or insulting language against the advocates of a different perspective on such matters. By contrast, the verbal attacks and threats of physical harm made against the applicants in the offending articles sought to undermine their intellectual personality, causing them feelings of fear, anxiety and vulnerability in order to humiliate them and break their will to defend their ideas.
The judgments of the domestic courts had dismissed all the applicants’ claims for damages on account of the articles. Those courts, without explicitly classifying the articles in a given category (statement of fact, value judgment or even hate speech or violent speech), had concluded (i) that they were not directly targeting the applicants and that they did notably contain gratuitous attacks on them; (ii) that the applicants had to tolerate the harsh criticisms levelled against them, both because of their status and because of their own criticisms in the report against their ideological opponents; and (iii) that the articles fell within the legislation protecting the freedom of expression of their authors. The courts paid no particular attention to the threatening and violent expressions contained in the articles, except for the District Court, which found that the sentence “the price of our land has to be paid in blood and, if necessary, blood will be shed” was well known to the general public and did not constitute a threat to the applicants, and that “those who want to see the Turkish nation as a minority in this country will find us in their way” was a mere criticism in response to the opinions in the report. The Court cannot agree with the findings of the domestic courts for the reasons given above.
It could not be seen from the domestic courts’ findings that they had properly balanced the applicants’ right to respect for their private life and the freedom of the press. Their judgments had not provided a satisfactory answer to the question whether freedom of the press could justify, in the circumstances of the case, the damage caused to the applicants’ right to respect for their private life by passages that constituted hate speech and incitement to violence, thus being likely to expose them to public contempt. Therefore the national courts had not struck a fair balance between the applicants’ right to respect for their private life and the freedom of the press.
Conclusion: violation (unanimously).
Article 41: EUR 1,500 to each of the applicants in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
(See also Karataş v. Turkey [GC], 23168/94, 8 July 1999; Sürek v. Turkey (no. 1) [GC], 26682/95, 8 July 1999; Nilsen and Johnsen v. Norway [GC], 23118/93, 25 November 1999, Information Note 12; Özgür Gündem v. Turkey, 23144/93, 16 March 2000, Information Note 16; Balsytė-Lideikienė v. Lithuania, 72596/01, 4 November 2008, Information Note 113; Féret v. Belgium, 15615/07, 16 July 2009, Information Note 121; Dink v. Turkey, 2668/07 et al., 14 septembre 2010, Information Note 133; Vejdeland and Others v. Sweden, 1813/07, 9 February 2012, Information Note 149; Fáber v. Hungary, 40721/08, 24 July 2012, Information Note 154; and Mater v. Turkey, 54997/08, 16 July 2013, Information Note 165. See also the Factsheet on Hate Speech)


CASE: Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC]
Article 8 (Respect for Private Life) - Mass Surveillance of Mobile Communications.

---
CASE SUMMARİES:
Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC] - 47143/06
Judgment 4.12.2015 [GC]
Article 34

Victim

User of mobile phone complaining of system of secret surveillance without effective domestic remedies: victim status upheld
Article 8

Article 8-1

Respect for private life

Shortcomings in legal framework governing secret surveillance of mobile telephone communications: violation
Facts – The applicant, who was the editor-in-chief of a publishing company, brought judicial proceedings against three mobile network operators, complaining of interference with his right to privacy of his telephone communications. He claimed that pursuant to the relevant domestic law, the mobile network operators had installed equipment which permitted the Federal Security Service (FSB) to intercept all telephone communications without prior judicial authorisation. He sought an injunction ordering the removal of the equipment and ensuring that access to telecommunications was given to authorised persons only.
The domestic courts rejected the applicant’s claim, finding that he had failed to prove that his telephone conversations had been intercepted or that the mobile operators had transmitted protected information to unauthorised persons. Installation of the equipment to which he referred did not in itself infringe the privacy of his communications.
In the Convention proceedings the applicant complained that the system of covert interception of mobile telephone communications in Russia did not comply with the requirements of Article 8 of the Convention. On 11 March 2014 a Chamber of the Court relinquished jurisdiction to the Grand Chamber.
Law – Article 8
(a) Victim status – The Court’s approach in Kennedy v. the United Kingdom was best tailored to the need to ensure that the secrecy of surveillance measures does not result in the measures being effectively unchallengeable and outside the supervision of the national judicial authorities and the Court. Accordingly, an applicant can claim to be the victim of a violation occasioned by the mere existence of secret surveillance measures or of legislation permitting such measures, if the following conditions are satisfied:
(i) Scope of the legislation – The Court will take into account the scope of the legislation permitting secret surveillance measures by examining whether the applicant can possibly be affected by it, either because he or she belongs to a group of persons targeted by the contested legislation or because the legislation directly affects all users of communication services by instituting a system where any person can have his or her communications intercepted.
(ii) Availability of remedies at national level – The Court will take into account the availability of remedies at the national level and will adjust the degree of scrutiny depending on the effectiveness of such remedies. Where the domestic system does not afford an effective remedy, widespread suspicion and concern among the general public that secret surveillance powers are being abused cannot be said to be unjustified. In such circumstances the menace of surveillance can be claimed in itself to restrict free communication through the postal and telecommunication services, thereby constituting for all users or potential users a direct interference with the right guaranteed by Article 8. There is therefore a greater need for scrutiny by the Court and an exception to the rule which denies individuals the right to challenge a law in abstracto is justified. In such cases the individual does not need to demonstrate the existence of any risk that secret surveillance measures were applied to him. By contrast, if the national system provides for effective remedies, a widespread suspicion of abuse is more difficult to justify. In such cases, the individual may claim to be a victim of a violation occasioned by the mere existence of secret measures or of legislation permitting secret measures only if he is able to show that, due to his personal situation, he is potentially at risk of being subjected to such measures.
In the instant case, the contested legislation directly affected all users of the mobile telephone services, since it instituted a system of secret surveillance under which any person using the mobile telephone services of national providers could have their mobile telephone communications intercepted, without ever being notified of the surveillance. Furthermore, the domestic law did not provide for effective remedies for persons suspecting they had been subjected to secret surveillance. An examination of the relevant legislation in abstracto was therefore justified. The applicant did not need to demonstrate that due to his personal situation he had been at risk of being subjected to secret surveillance. He was thus entitled to claim to be the victim of a violation of the Convention.
Conclusion: preliminary objection dismissed (unanimously).
(b) Merits – The mere existence of the contested legislation amounted in itself to an interference with the exercise of the applicant’s rights under Article 8. The interception of mobile telephone communications had a basis in the domestic law and pursued the legitimate aims of the protection of national security and public safety, the prevention of crime and the protection of the economic well-being of the country. It remained to be ascertained whether the domestic law was accessible and contained adequate and effective safeguards and guarantees to meet the requirements of “foreseeability” and “necessity in a democratic society”.
(i) Accessibility – It was common ground that almost all the domestic legal provisions governing secret surveillance had been officially published and were accessible to the public. Although there was some dispute over the accessibility of further provisions, the Court noted that they had been published in an official ministerial magazine and could be accessed through an internet legal database, and so did not find it necessary to pursue the issue further.
(ii) Scope of application of secret surveillance measures – The nature of the offences which could give rise to an interception order was sufficiently clear. However, it was a matter of concern that the domestic law allowed secret interception of communications in respect of a very wide range of offences. Furthermore, interception could be ordered not only in respect of a suspect or an accused, but also in respect of persons who might have information about an offence. While the Court had found in a previous case* that interception measures in respect of a person possessing information about an offence might be justified under Article 8, it noted in the instant case that the domestic law did not clarify who might fall into that category in practice. Nor did the law give any indication of the circumstances under which communications could be intercepted on account of events or activities endangering Russia’s national, military, economic or ecological security. Instead, it left the authorities an almost unlimited discretion in determining which events or acts constituted such a threat and whether the threat was serious enough to justify secret surveillance. This created possibilities for abuse.
(iii) Duration of secret surveillance measures – While the domestic law contained clear rules on the duration and renewal of interceptions providing adequate safeguards against abuse, the relevant provisions on discontinuation of the surveillance measures did not provide sufficient guarantees against arbitrary interference.
(iv) Procedures for, inter alia, storing and destroying intercepted data – Domestic law contained clear rules governing the storage, use and communication of intercepted data, making it possible to minimise the risk of unauthorised access or disclosure. However, although the Court considered reasonable the six-month time-limit applicable to the storage of intercept material if the person concerned was not charged with a criminal offence, it deplored the lack of a requirement to destroy immediately any data that were not relevant to the purpose for which they were obtained. The automatic storage for six months of clearly irrelevant data could not be considered justified under Article 8.
Further, in cases where the person under surveillance was charged with a criminal offence the trial judge had unlimited discretion under the domestic law to decide whether to order the further storage or destruction of intercept material used in evidence. Ordinary citizens thus had no indication as to the circumstances in which intercept material could be stored. The domestic law was, therefore, not sufficiently clear on this point.
(v) Authorisation of interceptions – As regards the authorisation procedures, any interception of telephone or other communications had to be authorised by a court. However, judicial scrutiny was limited in scope. In particular, materials containing information about undercover agents or police informers or about the organisation and tactics of operational-search measures could not be submitted to the judge and were therefore excluded from the court’s scope of review. Thus the failure to disclose the relevant information to the courts deprived them of the power to assess whether there was a sufficient factual basis for suspecting persons in respect of whom operational-search measures were requested of a criminal offence or of activities endangering national, military, economic or ecological security. Indeed, Russian judges were not instructed to verify the existence of “reasonable suspicion” against the person concerned or to apply the “necessity” and “proportionality” tests.
In addition, the relevant domestic law did not contain any requirements with regard to the content of interception requests or authorisations. As a result, courts sometimes authorised the interception of all telephone communications in an area where a criminal offence had been committed, without mentioning a specific person or telephone number. Some authorisations did not mention the duration for which interception was authorised. Such authorisations granted a very wide discretion to the law-enforcement authorities as to which communications to intercept and for how long.
Furthermore, in cases of urgency it was possible to intercept communications without prior judicial authorisation for up to 48 hours. However, the urgent procedure did not provide sufficient safeguards to ensure that it was used sparingly and only in duly justified cases. The domestic law did not limit the use of the urgent procedure to cases involving immediate serious danger and so gave the authorities unlimited discretion to determine the situations in which it was used, thus creating possibilities for abuse. Furthermore, although under domestic law a judge had to be immediately informed of each instance of urgent interception, the judge’s power was limited to authorising the extension of the interception measure beyond 48 hours. Russian law thus did not provide for an effective judicial review of the urgent procedure.
In sum, the authorisation procedures provided for by Russian law were not capable of ensuring that secret surveillance measures were not ordered haphazardly, irregularly or without due and proper consideration.
An added difficulty was that law-enforcement authorities generally had no obligation under the domestic law to show judicial authorisation to the communications service provider before obtaining access to communications, while for their part the service providers were required to install equipment giving the authorities direct access to all users’ mobile telephone communications. The system was therefore particularly prone to abuse.
(vi) Supervision – The prohibition set out in domestic law on logging or recording interceptions made it impossible for the supervising authority to discover interceptions carried out without proper judicial authorisation. Combined with the authorities’ technical ability to intercept communications directly, this provision rendered any supervisory arrangements incapable of detecting unlawful interceptions and was therefore ineffective.
Where interceptions were carried out on the basis of proper judicial authorisation, judicial supervision was limited to the initial authorisation stage. Subsequent supervision was entrusted to the President, Parliament, the Government, the Prosecutor General and competent lower-level prosecutors. The domestic law did not set out the manner in which the President, Parliament and the Government were to supervise interceptions. There were no publicly available regulations or instructions describing the scope of their review, the conditions under which it could be carried out, or the procedures for reviewing the surveillance measures or remedying breaches.
While a legal framework provided, at least in theory, for some supervision by prosecutors, it was not capable in practice of providing adequate and effective guarantees against abuse. In particular:
– there were doubts about the prosecutors’ independence as they were appointed and dismissed by the Prosecutor General after consultation with the regional executive authorities and had overlapping functions as they both approved requests for interception and then supervised their implementation;
– there were limits on the scope of their supervision (prosecutors had no information about the work of undercover agents and surveillance measures related to counter-intelligence escaped their supervision as the persons concerned would be unaware they were subject to surveillance and were thus unable to lodge a complaint);
– there were limits on their powers, for example, even though they could take measures to stop or remedy breaches and to bring those responsible to account, there was no specific provision requiring destruction of unlawfully obtained intercept material;
– their supervision was not open to public scrutiny and knowledge as their reports were not published or otherwise accessible to the public;
– the Government had not submitted any inspection reports or decisions by prosecutors ordering the taking of measures to stop or remedy a detected breach of law.
(vii) Notification of interception and available remedies – Persons whose communications were intercepted were not notified. Unless criminal proceedings were opened against the interception subject and the intercepted data was used in evidence, the person concerned was unlikely ever to find out if his or her communications had been intercepted.
Persons who did somehow find out could request information about the data concerned. However, in order to lodge such a request they had to be in possession of the facts of the operational-search measures to which they were subjected. Access to information was thus conditional on a person’s ability to prove that his or her communications had been intercepted. Furthermore, interception subjects were not entitled to obtain access to documents relating to the interception of their communications: they were at best entitled to receive “information” about the collected data. Such information was provided only in very limited circumstances, namely if the person’s guilt had not been proved in accordance with law and the information did not contain State secrets. Since, under Russian law, information about the facilities used in operational-search activities, the methods employed, the officials involved and the data collected constituted a State secret, the possibility of obtaining information about interceptions appeared ineffective.
The judicial remedies referred to by the Government were available only to persons in possession of information about the interception of their communications. Their effectiveness was therefore undermined by the absence of a requirement to notify the interception subject or of an adequate possibility to request and obtain information about interceptions from the authorities. Accordingly, Russian law did not provide an effective judicial remedy against secret surveillance measures in cases where no criminal proceedings were brought against the interception subject.
In sum, the domestic legal provisions governing the interception of communications did not provide adequate and effective guarantees against arbitrariness and the risk of abuse. The domestic law did not meet the “quality of law” requirement and was incapable of keeping the “interference” to what was “necessary in a democratic society”.
Conclusion: violation (unanimously).
Article 41: Finding of a violation constituted sufficient just satisfaction for any non-pecuniary damage.
(See Weber and Saravia v. Germany (dec.), 54934/00, 29 June 2006, Information Note 88; Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, 26839/05, 18 May 2010, Information Note 130; see, more generally, the Handbook on European data protection law)
* Iordachi and Others v. Moldova, 25198/02, 10 February 2009, Information Note 116.





